Q,1 --  What is tokenization? Give an example — show how the sentence "I'm learning NLP in 2025!" would be tokenized.

A,1 --  tokenization is the method that convert strings into characters/words/sentences, for Exemple:
Code: {         doc = nlp("I'm learning NLP in 2025!")
                for token in doc:
                print(token.text,token.pos_,token.dep_)        }
Output:{        I PRON nsubj
                'm AUX aux
                learning VERB ROOT
                NLP PROPN dobj
                in ADP prep
                2025 NUM pobj
                ! PUNCT punct       }


Q,2 --  What is the difference between stemming and lemmatization?
Apply both to the words "running" and "better" and explain which preserves more linguistic meaning.

A,2 -- the difference between stemming and lemmatization is that lemma go the the original value of the word by
logic connection in the sentence, on the other hand stemming ignore any logic in the sentence and can even cut the word with no really explanation.
lemma ex: running --> run ,, better --> well
stemm ex: running --> run ,, better --> bet


Q,3 --  What does TF-IDF stand for? Explain in plain language why the word "the" scores almost zero in TF-IDF,
while the word "photosynthesis" would score high.

A,3 -- TF-IDF is a formula to get the rarity of the words the document has, its giving score for how much the word is rare(biggest=rarest).
"photosynthesis" this word is rare and probably wont repeat again so its got high score,
on the other hand "the" is very common, almost every sentence contain this word so its got less score(every doc by its own).


Q,4 --  What is a sentence embedding? How is it fundamentally different from one-hot encoding?
Give one advantage embeddings have that one-hot vectors don't.

A,4 -- sentence embedding is a way to store documents into table of vectors, each vector represents each chunk on doc, each vector
is a list of numbers that represents the logic on each chunk. that how its get meaning and when question is asked its convert the question
to new vector and check similarity to other vector in the vector_db. the one-hot encoding is a way to know each word or full sentence(not recommended)
by only counting each one as a full string and if there is the word/sentence another time its get +1 to the string to the specific word/sentence
but the word/sentence as the string does not considerate any meaning in it,in the end you get a table of how many time
each chunk was count and that is it. unlike the embedding way.


Q,5 --  Explain cosine similarity in plain language.
If two document vectors point in almost the same direction, what does that tell us about the documents they represent?

A,5 -- cosine similarity is a way to find the vector that is pointing to the same direction as the question vector,
this way the length of the vector is not effective because cosine similarity is formula with the angle of the question vector.
we find the most little angle that calculate with the question vector and that's the answer vector.

Bonus (+0.5 optional): When might Euclidean distance be a poor choice for comparing embeddings?

A,Bonus -- Euclidean distance is a weak way to calculate similarity because the length of the vector effect the result,
for exemple, can be a vector with length(5) that will represent the same meaning as length(12).
the Euclidean distance will show that this two vectors are far different,
while the cosine similarity will show they are closer.


Q,6 --  Why can't a regular SQL query like WHERE description LIKE '%pizza%' find semantically similar documents?
What does a vector index solve that SQL can't?

A,6 -- vectorstore saving also the meaning in the vector values, the SQL query will search for a word
that contain the word 'pizza' but what if in the document they wrote "a flatbread with tomato sauce and cheese"? failure.


Q,7 --  What problem does RAG solve that a plain LLM (without RAG) cannot? Give a concrete example
of when you would choose RAG over just prompting the LLM directly.

A,7 -- plain llm work perfect and all but the databases he practice on is not including your
personal data as specific exam like Legal practice or Architecture if you have those files
on your computer llm not gonna answer as from your data but the plain llm data sources,
rag system can read your file and like a chatbot with llm's engine you get your required answer.


Q,8 --  Describe the 3 main steps of a RAG pipeline in the correct order.
Be clear about what happens at ingestion time (when you load documents) vs query time (when a user asks a question).

A,8 -- after upload of your pdf/docs file the rag go in this order: chunking,embedding,vectorstore,retriever,and then you build the chain.
first: chunking, split the text into sentences array as the defined splitter you choose.
second: embedding, convert the sentences array into vector_db by OPENAI_KEY or HUGGINGFACE_KEY or local docker-compose.
third: vectorstore, you store your vectors with chroma then you can define your retriever with as_retriever function.
forth: retriever, you define your retriever(the object that pull the answer) right after you define your vectorstore with croma.
you have a few methods of retriever but we use chroma so the retriever is plain function in this chroma object(using the distance cosine (1-cosine similarity)).

Q,9 --  What is the difference between a Docker image and a Docker container? Use an analogy to explain.

A,9 -- docker image is the config you install in your cmd it constitutes this config on your docker.
if you delete it, the cmd gonna need to pull again the config from the internet with the docker-compose.
on the other hand the container is the running instance of the image in your docker like local ollama config if you want to use it local
for access you must active the container.
analogy: image - installed file instructions, container - running instance of the image(perfume recipe and the actual perfume)


Q,10 --  What is the difference between a simple LLM chatbot and an AI agent with tools?
Give one concrete example of a "tool" and explain why it makes the agent more capable.

A,10 --  simple llm handling only the question - you ask he answer and return answer directly,
An AI agent always using the llm as a reasoning engine,also he know if he can solve the problem
by using his tools like calculator or http request, or to get his answer by the llm.
this way capable improving speed, also decrease the tokens you are using while the conversation because he's using his tolls instead.
think on structured calculator instead of asking the llm to compute a calculation, the agent can use a structured calculator.


Q,11 --  What is MCP (Model Context Protocol)?
What problem does it solve for AI coding assistants like GitHub Copilot? Name two examples of things an MCP server might expose to an AI assistant

A,11 -- MCP is an standard format that expose to an AI agents to get tools and data sources, this way its solve the problem that any API's or TOOLS
using other formats depend on the creator. but MCP is a unique way to call tools for the agent


Q,12 --  What are Agent Skills in the context of AI coding assistants? How are they different from just writing instructions in a plain prompt?
Show a minimal example of what a skill's .md metadata block might look like.

A,12 -- Agent skills is a way to guide the agent to get the answer, a plain prompt is way to ask the llm question and give the llm
some description of what he suppose to do.
Agent skills is a way to give llm instructions to handle the question,also this way you tell the llm when to use it
and what way to answer it, prompt more manual way unlike Agent skills is a automatic and reusable prompt that help the llm to give structured answer.

SKILL.md example:
GOAL:
    help analyze postgres queries for better performance
WHEN TO USE:
    - when the user asks about slow queries.
    - when the user ask about optimization.
INSTRUCTIONS:
    1. analyze the query structure.
    2. check for performance issue.
    3. suggest optimizations.
    4. rewrite the query in optimized way.
    5. recommend on question format, give example.
OUTPUT FORMAT:
    - explain the issue briefly
    - suggest improvements
    - provide example of the better query


